# Content Extracted from Calculus 1 lecnote7_202512281308_09617.pdf

---

### Example (Page 1)
**Category:** Solution

**Statement:**
> Semester 1 - Calculus I(lec7) Faculty of Computer Science (CS+IT)
> Lecture Seven
> 1 Implicit Differentiation
> 1.1 Implicit and Explicit Function
> 2
> Consider the function y = 3x − 5, the variable y is explicit by written as a function of x,
> and every function can be expressed in the form y = f (x) [y is a function of x] is called
> explicit function. But, there are some functions however are only implied by and equation.
> 1
> For instance, the function y = is defined implicitly by the equation xy = 1.
> x
> dy
> b
> If we were asked to find for this equation, we could begin by writing y explicitly as a
> dx u
> function of x and differentiating.
> o
> Implicit Form xy = 1
> z
> 1
> −1 g
> Explicit Form y = = x
> x
> a
> dy −1
> −2
> Derivative = −x =
> dx Mx2
> This strategy works whenever we can solve for the function explicitly.
> We cannot use this procedure when we unable to solve for y as a function of x. For example,
> h
> 2 2
> for the function x −2y +4y = 2, here it is very difficult to express y as a function of x explicitly.
> i
> For this reason we will use implicit differentiation.
> t
> a
> 1.2 Guidelines for Implicit Differentiation
> f
> l
> 1. Differentiate both sides of tEhe given equation with respect to x.
> ddy
> 2. Collect all terms involving on the left side of the equation and move all other terms
> dx
> h
> to the right side of the equation.
> o
> dy
> M
> 3. Factor out of the left side of the equation.
> dx
> dy
> 4. Solve for by dividing both sides of the equation by the left hand factor that does not
> y
> dx
> dy
> B
> contain .
> dx
> dy
> Example 1.2.1 Find for the given functions.
> dx
> 3 2 2
> 1. y + y − 5y − x = −4

**Solution:**
> Firstly Differentiate both sides of the equation w.r.t x
> d d
> 3 2 2
> [y + y − 5y − x ] = [−4]
> dx dx
> we get
> dy dy dy
> 2
> 3y + 2y − 5 − 2x = 0
> dx dx dx
> 1 IMPLICIT DIFFERENTIATION (pg 1)

---

### Example (Page 3)
**Category:** Solution

**Statement:**
> Semester 1 - Calculus I(lec7) Faculty of Computer Science (CS+IT)
> 3 3
> d y d
> ′′′ ′′′
> 3
> and we denote it by y , , f (x) , [f (x)] and also D [y].
> x
> dx3 dx3
> In general
> (cid:20) (cid:21)
> n n−1 (n−1) (n−1)
> d y d d y f (x + h) − f (x)
> = = lim
> dxn dx dxn−1 h
> h→0
> (4)
> Example 2.1.2 1. y = sin 3x, prove that y = 81y
> Proof
> b
> ′
> y = 3 cos 3x
> u
> ′′
> y = − 9 sin 3x
> o
> ′′′
> y = − 27 cos 3x
> z
> (4)
> y = 81 sin 3x = 81y
> g
> a
> n (n) 5
> 2. y = x , prove that y = n! and find the fifth derivative for y = x .
> M

**Solution:**
> h
> ′ ′′ ′′′
> n n−1 n−2 n−3
> y = x ⇒ y = nx ⇒ y = n(n − 1)x ⇒ y = n(n − 1)(n − 2)x
> i
> t
> This implies that
> a
> f
> (n) n−n
> y = n(n − 1)(n − 2) . . . 3 × 2 × 1 × x = n!
> l
> E
> 5 (5)
> Now for y = x ⇒ y = 5! = 120
> d
> 2
> d y
> h
> 2 2 2
> 3. Find if x + xy + y = a .
> dx2
> o
> M
> Sol
> Differentiate both sides w.r.t x
> y
> ′ ′
> B 2x + (xy + y) + 2yy = 0 (2.1.1)
> ′ ′
> Then collect all y terms on the left side and then solve for y
> ′ ′
> ⇒ xy + 2yy = −2x − y
> −(2x + y)
> ′ ′
> ⇒ y (x + 2y) = −(2x + y) ⇒ y =
> x + 2y
> Now, by differentiating both sides of equation 2.1.1 w.r.t x, we get:
> (cid:16) (cid:17)
> ′′ ′ ′ ′ ′
> 2
> ⇒ 2 + xy + y + y + 2 yy + (y ) = 0
> ′′ ′′ ′ ′
> 2
> ⇒ xy + 2yy = −2 − 2y − 2(y )
> ′ ′
> 2
> −(2 + 2y + 2(y ) )
> ′′ ′ ′ ′′
> 2
> ⇒ y (x + 2y) = −(2 + 2y + 2(y ) ) ⇒ y =
> x + 2y
> 2 HIGHER DERIVATIVES (pg 3)

---

### Rule (Page 4)
**Category:** Law

**Statement:**
> Faculty of Computer Science (CS+IT) Semester 1 - Calculus I(lec7)
> ′ ′′
> Then by substituting y on equation of y , we get:
> (cid:34) (cid:35)
> (cid:18) (cid:19)2
> −(2x + y) −(2x + y)
> ′′
> y = − 2 + 2 + 2 ÷ (2y + x)
> 2y + x 2y + x
> (cid:20) (cid:21)
> 2 2
> 2(2y + x) − 2(2y + x)(2x + y) + 2(2x + y)
> = − ÷ (2y + x)
> (2y + x)2
> (cid:20) (cid:21)
> 2 2 2 2 2 2
> 2(4y + 4xy + x ) − 8xy − 4y − 4x − 2xy + 2(4x + 4xy + y )
> = −
> (2y + x)3
> 2 2 2
> −6(x + xy + y ) −6a
> = =
> (x + 2y)3 (x + 2y)3
> Exercise 2.1.1 For the function x 2 + y 2 = a 2 b
> −a 2 u
> ′′
> 1. Prove that y =
> y3
> o
> z
> 2
> 3a x
> ′′′
> 2. Prove that y =
> g
> y5
> a
> M
> 2.2 Leibniz’s Rule (Generalized Product Rule)
> It gives us a formula to compute the nth derivative of the product of two functions. It extend
> the simple product rule to higher-order derivativhes.
> Theorem 2.2.1 If f (x) and g(x) are differenitiable functions n-times, then nth derivative of
> t
> their product is:
> a
> n (cid:18) (cid:19)
> d n
> (cid:88)
> f
> (n−k) (k)
> [f (x).g(x)] = f (x).g (x)
> l
> dx k
> E
> k=0
> (cid:18) (cid:19)
> n
> d
> is the binomial coefficient (n choose k)
> k
> h
> Where
> (n−k)
> f (x) means the (n − k)-th derivative of f (x)
> o
> (k)
> g means the k-th derivative of g(x)
> M
> Note that, for n = 1 the formula reduces to the ordinary product rule.
> ′ ′ ′
> (f g) = f (x)g(x) + f (x)g (x)
> y
> 4
> Example 2.2.3 Find the fourth derivative for the function y = x sin x
> B
> Sol
> 4 (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
> 4
> d 4 4 4
> (cid:88)
> 4 4 (4−k) (k) 4 (4−0) (0) 4 (4−1) (1)
> [x sin x] = (x ) .(sin x) = (x ) .(sin x) + (x ) .(sin x)
> dx4 k 0 1
> k=0
> (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
> 4 4 4
> 4 (4−2) (2) 4 (4−3) (3) 4 (4−4) (4)
> + (x ) .(sin x) + (x ) .(sin x) + (x ) .(sin x)
> 2 3 4
> (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
> 4 4 4
> 4 (4) 4 (3) (1) 4 (2) (2)
> = (x ) .(sin x) + (x ) .(sin x) + (x ) .(sin x)
> 0 1 2
> (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
> 4 4
> 4 (1) (3) 4 (4)
> + (x ) .(sin x) + (x ).(sin x)
> 3 4
> 2 3 4
> = 4! sin x + 4(4 × 3 × 2)x cos x + 6(4 × 3)x (− sin x) + 4(4x )(− cos x) + x sin x
> 4 3 2
> = x sin x − 16x cos x − 72x sin x + 96x cos x + 24 sin x
> (4) 4 2x
> Exercise 2.2.2 Find y if y = x e
> (pg 4) 2 HIGHER DERIVATIVES

---
