# Extracted Content: Lec 4_094659.pdf

### Page Content (Page 3)
**Category**: Raw Text

> OBJECTIVES AND INTENDED OUTCOMES
> By the end of this lesson the learner is expected to:
> 雒ｱ
> Understand the concept of software, program, programming, and
> 雒ｱ
> programming languages.
> Learn the types of software.
> 雒ｱ
> Learn the system software and application software.
> 雒ｱ
> Understand the concept of the software components,
> 雒ｱ

---

### Page Content (Page 4)
**Category**: Raw Text

> Software
> Software non-physical units that drive the computer to perform
> 雒ｱ
> tasks that are performed by the hardware components.
> The software is divided into two parts:
> 雒ｱ
> System software
> 雒ｱ
> Translation software
> 雒ｱ
> Operating Systems
> 雒ｱ
> 雒ｱ Application software
> user programs
> 雒ｱ
> Packages software
> 雒ｱ

---

### Page Content (Page 5)
**Category**: Raw Text

> system software
> system software refers to the programs that manage the
> 雒ｱ
> computer. divided into:
> Compiler Software: programs that convert a program written
> 雒ｱ
> in programming language into an executable program written
> in machine language
> Operating System: a set of basic programs that acts as an
> 雒ｱ
> interface between the computer user and computer
> hardware, and controls the execution of programs.
> 雒ｱ Ex: Mac , Windows, Linux...

---

### Page Content (Page 6)
**Category**: Raw Text

> system software Cont..
> The common management tasks that an operating system perform
> 雒ｱ
> include:
> 雒ｱ File Management
> 雒ｱ User Management
> 雒ｱ Memory Management
> 雒ｱ Process Management
> 雒ｱ Device Management
> 雒ｱ Security Management
> 雒ｱ User Interface Management

---

### Page Content (Page 7)
**Category**: Raw Text

> Application software
> Application Software: Programs designed to perform a
> 雒ｱ
> specific task for users.
> Divided into two types:
> 雒ｱ
> User Programs: Each user can write their own programs to solve a
> 雒ｱ
> specific issue using one of the programming languages.
> Packages software: Developed by software production companies.
> 雒ｱ
> 7

---

### Page Content (Page 8)
**Category**: Raw Text

> programs
> Programs refer to instructions that are directed to a computer
> 雒ｱ
> for the purpose of performing a specific task, and computers
> need programs to perform each task they perform.
> Writing a program is called programming, and whoever does it is
> 雒ｱ
> called a programmer.
> Programming It is preparing a plan to process a task and get the
> 雒ｱ
> desired results
> A programming language is a system of notation for writing
> 雒ｱ
> computer programs. programming languages are text-based
> formal languages.

---

